---
icon: fas fa-robot
title: LR AI Assistant
permalink: /lrc-ai-assistant/
order: 3
---

A Lightroom Classic plugin to fill **keywords**, **image title**, **caption** and **Alt Text** by using **ChatGPT**, **Gemini** or local **Ollama**. 

#### Currently Available models

**There is a [poll](https://github.com/bmachek/lrc-ai-assistant/discussions/28) at GitHub, on which AI models you prefer most. Please share your likings! :-)**

With the release of version 3.6.0 of the plugin, there has been a change in selection of Ollama models.
From now on, the plugin queries the Ollama API for locally installed models, which have the capability **"vision"**.

| **ChatGPT** | **Gemini** | **Ollama** |
| gpt-4.1-nano | 1.5pro | Any local vision model |
| gpt-4.1-mini | 2.0-flash | |
| gpt-4.1 | 2.0-flash-lite |  |
| gpt-4o-mini | 2.5pro | |
| gpt-4o |  | |

#### Privacy
If your concerned about the privacy of your images, using Ollama might be a good idea. 
This way your images stay on your hardware.
Also the use of ChatGPT or Gemini on will generate costs.
Depending on your hardware and internet connection either Ollama or Gemini/ChatGPT can be faster.

#### Download the plugin
[Download](https://github.com/bmachek/lrc-ai-assistant/releases/latest/)

#### Installation
[Installation guide]({% link _articles/install-plugin.md %})

#### Usage
* Install plugin using Lightroom addon module manager.
* Obtain an API key for the model you want to use or install Ollama:
  * [Obtain Google Gemini API key](https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey)
  * [Obtain ChatGPT API key](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys)
  * [Download and setup Ollama on your local machine]({% link _articles/ollama-setup.md %})
* Configure API key in Lightroom module manager. (Not needed for Ollama.)
* Choose the model you want to use on the Lightroom module manager.
* Go to Library in Lightroom
* Select some photos
* Go to menu -> Library -> Addon Modules -> Analyze photo(s) with AI
* If enabled a preflight dialogs pops up, where the settings for the batch run can be set/verified.
* Also if enabled, a photo context dialog pops up for every photo, with a preview of the image and a text box to enter additional information for the specific image. This drastically improves the results.
* If enabled review before save for title, caption or Alt Text and the field is already filled with data, a review dialog will show up. There is not (yet) a dialog for reviewing keywords.
* Wait it to fill your keywords, caption, title and Alt Text as selected.
* The plugin is designed to stop only on fatal errors.

#### Troubleshooting

If you run into troubles, best thing to do is check the log file.
Easiest way to find the log file, is by opening the Lightroom module manager, navigate to the AI Assitant plugin, and enable debug logging.
There's also a button *Show log file*. 
If nothing helps, [open an issue](https://github.com/bmachek/lrc-ai-assistant/issues/new/choose) over at GitHub.

#### Notes
* All generated keywords are hierarchically beneath a top keyword "Google Gemini", "ChatGPT" or "Ollama". The hierarchy beyond can be edited in "Library -> Addon Modules -> Edit Keyword Categories".
  You can easily remove all keywords generated by the plugin, by deleting the top keyword in Lightroom's keyword list.
  Additionally you can create smart collections with filters for top keyword to keep track of photos that have or haven't been analyzed yet.
* Feel free to open issues or discussions. Any feedback is welcome.

#### Credits
* All contributors
* Guillermo Esteves for [his plugin](https://github.com/gesteves/lightroom-alt-text-plugin), which gave me the idea for this one, and on which the source code is based on.
* Enrique García Cota for [inspect.lua](https://github.com/kikito/inspect.lua)
* Jeffrey Friedl for [JSON.lua](https://regex.info/blog/lua/json)
